CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY
Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. (3) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Sanhita and not otherwise for every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within India.
Section 2. Definitions. - In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires,- (1) "act" denotes as well a series of acts as a single act; (2) "animal" denotes any living creature, other than a human being; (3) "child" means any person below the age of eighteen years; (4) "court" means a Judge empowered by law to act judicially alone, or a body of Judges empowered by law to act judicially as a body; (5) "document" means any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks, including electronic and digital records; (6) "fraudulently" means doing anything with intent to defraud but not otherwise; (7) "gender" includes male, female and transgender; (8) "good faith" means an act done or believed with due care and attention; (9) "government" means the Central Government or a State Government; (10) "injury" denotes any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body, mind, reputation or property; (11) "illegal" and "legally bound to do" apply to everything which is an offence or prohibited by law; (12) "judge" denotes a person officially designated as a judge; (13) "life" denotes the life of a human being; (14) "month" and "year" denote according to the Gregorian calendar; (15) "movable property" includes property of every description, except land and things attached to the earth; (16) "oath" includes a solemn affirmation substituted by law for an oath; (17) "offence" denotes a thing made punishable by this Sanhita or any special or local law; (18) "omission" denotes as well a series of omissions as a single omission; (19) "person" includes any company or association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not; (20) "public" includes any class of the public or any community; (21) "public servant" denotes persons in service or pay of the Government; (22) "reason to believe" means sufficient cause to believe that thing but not otherwise; (23) "special law" means a law applicable to a particular subject; (24) "valuable security" denotes a document whereby any legal right is created, extended, transferred, restricted, extinguished or released; (25) "vessel" denotes anything made for the conveyance by water of human beings or of property; (26) "voluntarily" means causing an effect by means whereby the person intended to cause it or knew was likely to cause it; (27) "wrongful gain" means gain by unlawful means of property to which the person gaining is not legally entitled; (28) "wrongful loss" means the loss by unlawful means of property to which the person losing it is legally entitled.

CHAPTER II - OF PUNISHMENTS
Section 4. Punishments. - The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Sanhita are- (a) Death; (b) Imprisonment for life; (c) Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely: (i) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour; (ii) Simple; (d) Forfeiture of property; (e) Fine; (f) Community service.
Section 5. Commutation of sentence. - The appropriate Government may, without the consent of the offender, commute any sentence of death to imprisonment for life, or any other lesser punishment.

CHAPTER III - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
Section 14. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law. - Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it. (Replaced IPC Section 76).
Section 15. Act of Judge when acting judicially. - Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge when acting judicially in the exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be, given to him by law. (Replaced IPC Section 77).
Section 17. Act done by accident in doing a lawful act. - Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune, and without any criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful means and with proper care and caution. (Replaced IPC Section 80).
Section 20. Act of a child under seven years of age. - Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under seven years of age. (Replaced IPC Section 82).
Section 22. Act of a person of unsound mind. - Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law. (Replaced IPC Section 84).
Section 23. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will. - Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by reason of intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, provided that the thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without his knowledge or against his will. (Replaced IPC Section 85).
Section 25. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent. - Nothing is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause to a person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, even without that person's consent, if the circumstances are such that it is impossible for that person to signify consent, or if that person is incapable of giving consent. (Replaced IPC Section 92).
Section 34. Right of private defence of body and property. - Every person has a right, subject to the restrictions contained in this Chapter, to defend- (a) his own body, and the body of any other person, against any offence affecting the human body; (b) the property, whether movable or immovable, of himself or of any other person, against any act which is an offence falling under the definition of theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass. (Replaced IPC Section 97).
Section 38. When the right of private defence of the body extends to causing death. - The right of private defence of the body extends, under the restrictions mentioned in section 37, to the voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the assailant, if the offence which occasions the exercise of the right be of any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely:- (a) An assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that death will otherwise be the consequence; (b) An assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension of grievous hurt; (c) An assault with the intention of committing rape or gratifying unnatural lust; (d) An assault with the intention of kidnapping or abducting. (Replaced IPC Section 100).

CHAPTER IV - OF ABETMENT, CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
Section 45. Abetment of a thing. - A person abets the doing of a thing, who- First - Instigates any person to do that thing; or Secondly - Engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy; or Thirdly - Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing. (Replaced IPC Section 107).
Section 61. Criminal conspiracy. - (1) When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be done- (a) an illegal act; or (b) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy: Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount to a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or more parties to such agreement in pursuance thereof. (2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, shall be punished in the same manner as if he had abetted such offence. (Replaced IPC Section 120A, 120B).
Section 62. Punishment for attempt. - Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Sanhita with imprisonment for life or imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be committed, and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term provided for that offence, or with fine, or with both. (Replaced IPC Section 511).

CHAPTER V - OF OFFENCES AGAINST WOMAN AND CHILD
Section 63. Rape. - A man is said to commit "rape" if he penetrates his penis, or inserts any object or body part, or applies mouth into the vagina, urethra, anus or mouth of a woman against her will, without her consent, or with consent obtained under fear of death or hurt. (Replaced IPC Section 375).
Section 64. Punishment for rape. - (1) Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. (Replaced IPC Section 376).
Section 74. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty. - Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. (Replaced IPC Section 354).
Section 79. Word, gesture or act intended to insult modesty of a woman. - Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any words, makes any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, or intrudes upon the privacy of such woman, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and also with fine. (Replaced IPC Section 509).

CHAPTER VI - OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
Section 100. Culpable homicide. - Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide. (Replaced IPC Section 299).
Section 101. Murder. - Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or if it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused. (Replaced IPC Section 300).
Section 103. Punishment for murder. - (1) Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. (2) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert commits murder on the ground of race, caste or community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar ground, each member of such group shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. (Replaced IPC Section 302).
Section 105. Culpable homicide not amounting to murder. - Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which death is caused is done with the intention of causing death; or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if done with knowledge that it is likely to cause death. (Replaced IPC Section 304).
Section 106. Causing death by negligence. - (1) Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. (2) Whoever causes the death of any person by rash and negligent driving of vehicle, and fails to report the matter to a police officer or Magistrate soon after the incident, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. (Replaced IPC Section 304A).
Section 115. Hurt. - Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any person is said to cause hurt. (Replaced IPC Section 319).
Section 116. Grievous hurt. - The following kinds of hurt only are designated as "grievous":- (a) Emasculation; (b) Permanent privation of the sight of either eye; (c) Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear; (d) Privation of any member or joint; (e) Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or joint; (f) Permanent disfiguration of the head or face; (g) Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth; (h) Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer to be during the space of fifteen days in severe bodily pain, or unable to follow his ordinary pursuits. (Replaced IPC Section 320).
Section 117. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt. - Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, if the hurt which he intends to cause or knows himself to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if the hurt which he causes is grievous hurt, is said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt. (Replaced IPC Section 322).
Section 118. Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means. - Whoever causes hurt or grievous hurt by instruments for shooting, stabbing, or cutting, or by fire or corrosive substance, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and fine. (Replaced IPC Section 324, 326).
Section 137. Kidnapping. - Kidnapping is of two kinds: kidnapping from India, and kidnapping from lawful guardianship. (Replaced IPC Section 359).

CHAPTER VII - OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE
Section 147. Waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against Government of India. - Whoever wages war against the Government of India, or attempts to wage such war, or abets the waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. (Replaced IPC Section 121).
Section 150. Act endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity of India. - Whoever, purposely or knowingly, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible representation, or by electronic communication or by use of financial mean, or otherwise, excites or attempts to excite, secession or armed rebellion or subversive activities, or encourages feelings of separatist activities or endangers sovereignty or unity and integrity of India; or indulges in or commits any such act shall be punished with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. (Replaced IPC Section 124A).

CHAPTER XVII - OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section 303. Theft. - (1) Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft. (2) Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. (Replaced IPC Section 378, 379).
Section 308. Extortion. - (1) Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to any other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any property, or valuable security or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a valuable security, commits extortion. (2) Whoever commits extortion shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. (Replaced IPC Section 383, 384).
Section 309. Robbery. - In all robbery there is either theft or extortion. Theft is robbery if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the offender, for that end, voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint. Extortion is robbery if the offender, at the time of committing the extortion, is in the presence of the person put in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that person in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint. (Replaced IPC Section 390).
Section 310. Dacoity. - When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery, and persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or more, every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit dacoity. (Replaced IPC Section 391).
Section 311. Punishment for robbery. - Whoever commits robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the robbery be committed on the highway between sunset and sunrise, the imprisonment may be extended to fourteen years. (Replaced IPC Section 392).
Section 312. Punishment for dacoity. - Whoever commits dacoity shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. (Replaced IPC Section 395).
Section 314. Dishonest misappropriation of property. - Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any movable property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. (Replaced IPC Section 403).
Section 316. Criminal breach of trust. - (1) Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits criminal breach of trust. (2) Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. (Replaced IPC Section 405, 406).
Section 318. Cheating. - (1) Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to cheat. (2) Whoever cheats shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. (4) Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. (Replaced IPC Section 415, 420).
Section 324. Mischief. - (1) Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction of any property, or any such change in any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its value or utility, or affects it injuriously, commits mischief. (2) Whoever commits mischief shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. (Replaced IPC Section 425, 426).
Section 329. Criminal trespass and house-trespass. - (1) Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of such property, or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains there with intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person, or with intent to commit an offence, is said to commit criminal trespass. (2) Whoever commits criminal trespass by entering into or remaining in any building, tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or any building used as a place for worship, or as a place for the custody of property, is said to commit house-trespass. (Replaced IPC Section 441, 442).

CHAPTER XVIII - OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND PROPERTY MARKS
Section 336. Forgery. - (1) Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a document or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any person, or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to enter into any express or implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits forgery. (2) Whoever commits forgery shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. (Replaced IPC Section 463, 465).
Section 338. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc. - Whoever forges a document which purports to be a valuable security or a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or which purports to give authority to any person to make or transfer any valuable security, or to receive the principal, interest or dividends thereon, or to receive or deliver any money, movable property, or valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. (Replaced IPC Section 467).
Section 340. Using as genuine a forged document or electronic record. - Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine any document or electronic record which he knows or has reason to believe to be a forged document or electronic record, shall be punished in the same manner as if he had forged such document or electronic record. (Replaced IPC Section 471).

CHAPTER XIX - OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT, ANNOYANCE AND DEFAMATION
Section 351. Criminal intimidation. - (1) Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation or property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with intent to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do any act which that person is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such threat, commits criminal intimidation. (2) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. (3) If the threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, or to cause the destruction of any property by fire, or to cause an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, the punishment may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. (Replaced IPC Section 503, 506).
Section 352. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace. - Whoever intentionally insults, and thereby gives provocation to any person, intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will cause him to break the public peace, or to commit any other offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. (Replaced IPC Section 504).
Section 356. Defamation. - (1) Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes concerning any person any imputation intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said to defame that person. (2) Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both, or with community service. (Replaced IPC Section 499, 500).
