CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY
Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. (3) It extends to the whole of India.
Section 2. Definitions. - In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "audio-video electronic means" shall include use of any communication device for video conferencing, recording of processes including search and seizure, statements, or evidence; (b) "bailable offence" means an offence which is shown as bailable in the First Schedule, or which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in force, and "non-bailable offence" means any other offence; (c) "charge" includes any head of charge when the charge contains more heads than one; (g) "cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "cognizable case" means a case in which, a police officer may, in accordance with the First Schedule or under any other law for the time being in force, arrest without warrant; (h) "complaint" means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate, with a view to his taking action under this Sanhita, that some person, whether known or unknown, has committed an offence, but does not include a police report; (l) "inquiry" means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this Sanhita by a Magistrate or Court; (m) "investigation" includes all the proceedings under this Sanhita for the collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person other than a Magistrate who is authorized by a Magistrate in this behalf; (o) "non-cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "non-cognizable case" means a case in which, a police officer has no authority to arrest without warrant; (r) "police report" means a report forwarded by a police officer to a Magistrate under sub-section (3) of section 193; (t) "public prosecutor" means any person appointed under section 18; (w) "summons-case" means a case relating to an offence, and not being a warrant-case; (x) "warrant-case" means a case relating to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years.

CHAPTER II - CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES
Section 6. Classes of Criminal Courts. - Besides the High Courts and the Courts constituted under any law, other than this Sanhita, there shall be, in every State, the following classes of Criminal Courts, namely:- (i) Courts of Session; (ii) Judicial Magistrates of the first class; (iii) Judicial Magistrates of the second class; (iv) Executive Magistrates.
Section 9. Court of Session. - (1) The State Government shall establish a Court of Session for every sessions division. (2) Every Court of Session shall be presided over by a Judge, to be appointed by the High Court.

CHAPTER V - ARREST OF PERSONS
Section 35. When police may arrest without warrant. - (1) Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person- (a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence; (b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years whether with or without fine, if the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary to prevent further offence, or for proper investigation, or to prevent tampering with evidence. (Replaced CrPC Section 41).
Section 37. Designated police officer and control room. - (1) The State Government shall establish a police control room in every district and at State level. (2) The State Government shall designate a police officer in every district and in every police station who shall be responsible for maintaining information about persons arrested.
Section 43. Arrest by private person and procedure on such arrest. - (1) Any private person may arrest or cause to be arrested any person who in his presence commits a non-bailable and cognizable offence, or any proclaimed offender, and, without unnecessary delay, shall make over or cause to be made over any person so arrested to a police officer. (Replaced CrPC Section 43).
Section 47. Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested. - (1) If any person acting under a warrant of arrest, or any police officer having authority to arrest, has reason to believe that the person to be arrested has entered into, or is within, any place, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place shall, on demand allow free ingress and afford all reasonable facilities for a search therein. (Replaced CrPC Section 47).
Section 53. Examination of accused by medical practitioner at the request of police officer. - (1) When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence of such a nature and alleged to have been committed under such circumstances that there are reasonable grounds for believing that an examination of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for a registered medical practitioner to make such examination of the person arrested. (Replaced CrPC Section 53).

CHAPTER VI - PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE
Section 63. Form of summons. - Every summons issued by a Court under this Sanhita shall be in writing, in duplicate, signed by the presiding officer of such Court or by such other officer as the High Court may, from time to time, by rule direct, and shall bear the seal of the Court, and may also be in electronic form. (Replaced CrPC Section 61).
Section 72. Form of warrant of arrest and duration. - (1) Every warrant of arrest issued by a Court under this Sanhita shall be in writing, signed by the presiding officer of such Court and shall bear the seal of the Court. (2) Every such warrant shall remain in force until it is cancelled by the Court which issued it, or until it is executed. (Replaced CrPC Section 70).
Section 84. Proclamation for person absconding. - (1) If any Court has reason to believe that any person against whom a warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is concealing himself so that such warrant cannot be executed, such Court may publish a written proclamation requiring him to appear at a specified place and at a specified time not less than thirty days from the date of publishing such proclamation. (Replaced CrPC Section 82).
Section 85. Attachment of property of person absconding. - (1) The Court issuing a proclamation under section 84 may, then or at any time after the publication of the proclamation, order the attachment of any property, movable or immovable, belonging to the proclaimed person. (Replaced CrPC Section 83).

CHAPTER VII - PROCESSES TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF THINGS
Section 94. Summons to produce document or other thing. - (1) Whenever any Court or any officer in charge of a police station considers that the production of any document, including electronic communication, or other thing is necessary or desirable for the purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita, such Court may issue a summons, or such officer a written order, to the person in whose possession or power such document or thing is believed to be, requiring him to attend and produce it. (Replaced CrPC Section 91).
Section 96. When search-warrant may be issued. - (1) Where any Court has reason to believe that a person to whom a summons or order under section 94 has been or might be addressed, will not produce the document or thing, or where such document or thing is not known to the Court to be in the possession of any person, or where the Court considers that the purpose of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding will be served by a general search or inspection, it may issue a search-warrant. (Replaced CrPC Section 93).
Section 105. Recording of search and seizure through audio-video electronic means. - The process of conducting search of a place or seizure of any property under this Chapter shall be recorded through audio-video electronic means, preferably by mobile phone, and the police officer shall prepare a list of all things seized in the course of such search and get it signed by the witnesses.

CHAPTER X - MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY
Section 163. Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger. - (1) In cases where, in the opinion of a District Magistrate, a Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered by the State Government in this behalf, there is sufficient ground for proceeding under this section and immediate prevention or speedy remedy is desirable, such Magistrate may, by a written order stating the material facts of the case, direct any person to abstain from a certain act or to take certain order with respect to certain property in his possession or under his management. (Replaced CrPC Section 144).

CHAPTER XII - INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE
Section 173. Information in cognizable cases (First Information Report). - (1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be read over to the informant; and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it: Provided that if the information is given by electronic communication, it shall be taken on record on being signed within three days by the person giving it. (2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub-section (1) shall be given forthwith, free of cost, to the informant or the victim. (Replaced CrPC Section 154).
Section 174. Information as to non-cognizable cases and investigation of such cases. - (1) When information is given to an officer in charge of a police station of the commission within the limits of such station of a non-cognizable offence, he shall enter the substance of the information in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe. (2) No police officer shall investigate a non-cognizable case without the order of a Magistrate having power to try such case or commit the case for trial. (Replaced CrPC Section 155).
Section 175. Police officer's power to investigate cognizable case. - (1) Any officer in charge of a police station may, without the order of a Magistrate, investigate any cognizable case which a Court having jurisdiction over the local area within the limits of such station would have power to inquire into or try under the provisions of Chapter XIII. (Replaced CrPC Section 156).
Section 179. Police officer's power to require attendance of witnesses. - (1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter may, by order in writing, require the attendance before himself of any person being within the limits of his own or any adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise, appears to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case. (Replaced CrPC Section 160).
Section 180. Examination of witnesses by police. - (1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter may examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case. (2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put to him by such officer, other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture. (3) The statement made by any person under this section may also be recorded by audio-video electronic means. (Replaced CrPC Section 161).
Section 183. Recording of confessions and statements. - (1) Any Magistrate may, whether or not he has jurisdiction in the case, record any confession or statement made to him in the course of an investigation under this Chapter or under any other law for the time being in force, or at any time afterwards before the commencement of the inquiry or trial. (2) Any confession or statement made under sub-section (1) may also be recorded by audio-video electronic means in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of an offence. (Replaced CrPC Section 164).
Section 187. Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four hours. - (1) Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody, and it appears that the investigation cannot be completed within the period of twenty-four hours fixed by section 58, the officer in charge of the police station shall transmit the accused to the nearest Magistrate. (2) The Magistrate may authorize the detention of the accused person, otherwise than in custody of the police, beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no Magistrate shall authorize the detention of the accused person in custody under this paragraph for a total period exceeding: (a) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years; (b) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other offence. (Replaced CrPC Section 167).
Section 193. Report of police officer on completion of investigation. - (1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be completed without unnecessary delay. (2) The investigation in relation to an offence under sections 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70, 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall be completed within two months from the date on which the information was recorded. (3) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the police station shall forward to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form prescribed by the State Government (Chargesheet / Final Report). (Replaced CrPC Section 173).

CHAPTER XXXVI - PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS
Section 478. In what cases bail to be taken. - (1) When any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station, or appears or is brought before a Court, and is prepared at any time while in the custody of such officer or at any stage of the proceeding before such Court to give bail, such person shall be released on bail. (Replaced CrPC Section 436).
Section 479. Maximum period for which undertrial prisoner can be detained. - (1) Where a person has, during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial under this Sanhita of an offence under any law (not being an offence for which the punishment of death or life imprisonment has been specified) undergone detention for a period extending up to one-half of the maximum period of imprisonment specified for that offence under that law, he shall be released by the Court on bail: Provided that where such person is a first-time offender (who has never been convicted of any offence in the past), he shall be released on bail by the Court if he has undergone detention for the period extending up to one-third of the maximum period of imprisonment. (Replaced CrPC Section 436A).
Section 480. When bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence. - (1) When any person accused of, or suspected of, the commission of any non-bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station, or appears or is brought before a Court other than the High Court or Court of Session, he may be released on bail, but he shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds for believing that he has been guilty of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life. (Replaced CrPC Section 437).
Section 482. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest (Anticipatory Bail). - (1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section that in the event of such arrest he shall be released on bail; and that Court may, after taking into consideration the nature and gravity of accusation, the antecedents of the applicant, and the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice, either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail. (Replaced CrPC Section 438).
Section 483. Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail. - (1) A High Court or Court of Session may direct that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail, and if the offence is of the nature specified in sub-section (3) of section 480, may impose any condition which it considers necessary for the purposes mentioned in that sub-section; and that any condition imposed by a Magistrate when releasing any person on bail be set aside or modified. (Replaced CrPC Section 439).

CHAPTER XXXIX - MISCELLANEOUS
Section 528. Saving of inherent powers of High Court. - Nothing in this Sanhita shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this Sanhita, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. (Replaced CrPC Section 482).
Section 530. Electronic processing and trial. - All trials, inquiries and proceedings under this Sanhita, including issuance, service and execution of summons and warrants, examination of complainant and witnesses, recording of evidence, and delivery of judgments, may be held in electronic mode, by use of electronic communication or audio-video electronic means.
