CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY
Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. (3) It applies to all judicial proceedings in or before any Court.
Section 2. Definitions. - In this Adhiniyam, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Court" includes all Judges and Magistrates, and all persons, except arbitrators, legally authorized to take evidence; (b) "conclusive proof" means when one fact is declared by this Adhiniyam to be conclusive proof of another, the Court shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not allow evidence to be given for the purpose of disproving it; (d) "document" means any matter expressed or described or otherwise recorded upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks, or any other means, and includes electronic and digital records; (e) "evidence" means and includes- (i) all statements which the Court permits or requires to be made before it by witnesses, in relation to matters of fact under inquiry; such statements are called oral evidence; (ii) all documents including electronic records produced for the inspection of the Court; such documents are called documentary evidence; (f) "fact" means and includes- (i) any thing, state of things, or relation of things, capable of being perceived by the senses; (ii) any mental condition of which any person is conscious; (g) "facts in issue" means and includes any fact from which, either by itself or in connection with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature or extent of any right, liability or disability asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding, necessarily follows; (j) "proved" - a fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters before it, the Court either believes it to exist, or considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists; (k) "disproved" - a fact is said to be disproved when, after considering the matters before it, the Court either believes that it does not exist, or considers its non-existence so probable that a prudent man ought to act upon the supposition that it does not exist; (l) "not proved" - a fact is said not to be proved when it is neither proved nor disproved.

CHAPTER II - RELEVANCY OF FACTS
Section 3. Evidence may be given of facts in issue and relevant facts. - Evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence or non-existence of every fact in issue and of such other facts as are hereinafter declared to be relevant, and of no others. (Replaced IEA Section 5).
Section 4. Relevancy of facts forming part of same transaction (Res Gestae). - Facts which, though not in issue, are so connected with a fact in issue as to form part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether they occurred at the same time and place or at different times and places. (Replaced IEA Section 6).
Section 6. Facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant facts. - Facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which establish the identity of any thing or person whose identity is relevant (Test Identification Parade), or fix the time or place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, are relevant. (Replaced IEA Section 9).
Section 7. Things said or done by conspirator in reference to common design. - Where there is reasonable ground to believe that two or more persons have conspired together to commit an offence or an actionable wrong, anything said, done or written by any one of such persons in reference to their common intention is a relevant fact as against each of the persons believed to be so conspiring. (Replaced IEA Section 10).
Section 22. Admission defined. - An admission is a statement, oral or documentary or contained in electronic form, which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is made by any of the persons, and under the circumstances, hereinafter mentioned. (Replaced IEA Section 17).
Section 23. Confession to police officer not to be proved. - No confession made to a police officer shall be proved as against a person accused of any offence. (Replaced IEA Section 25).
Section 24. Confession caused by inducement, threat or promise when irrelevant. - A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a criminal proceeding, if the making of the confession appears to the Court to have been caused by any inducement, threat or promise having reference to the charge against the accused person. (Replaced IEA Section 24).
Section 26. Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be found is relevant (Dying Declaration). - Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, are themselves relevant facts: (a) when the statement is made by a person as to the cause of his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death. (Replaced IEA Section 32(1)).
Section 39. Opinions of experts. - When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law or of science or art, or any other field, or as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions or electronic records, the opinions upon that point of persons specially skilled in such law, science or art (called experts) are relevant facts. (Replaced IEA Section 45).

CHAPTER III - FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED
Section 51. Fact judicially noticeable need not be proved. - No fact of which the Court will take judicial notice need be proved. (Replaced IEA Section 56).
Section 52. Facts of which Court must take judicial notice. - The Court shall take judicial notice of all laws in force in the territory of India, public Acts passed by Parliament, the accession to office, names, titles, functions, and signatures of the persons filling for the time being any public office in India. (Replaced IEA Section 57).
Section 53. Facts admitted need not be proved. - No fact need be proved in any proceeding which the parties thereto or their agents agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before the hearing, they agree to admit by any writing under their hands. (Replaced IEA Section 58).

CHAPTER IV - OF ORAL EVIDENCE
Section 54. Proof of facts by oral evidence. - All facts, except the contents of documents or electronic records, may be proved by oral evidence. (Replaced IEA Section 59).
Section 55. Oral evidence must be direct. - Oral evidence must, in all cases whatever, be direct; that is to say- if it refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he saw it; if it refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he heard it. (Replaced IEA Section 60).

CHAPTER V - OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
Section 56. Proof of contents of documents. - The contents of documents may be proved either by primary or by secondary evidence. (Replaced IEA Section 61).
Section 57. Primary evidence. - Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of the Court. Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is primary evidence of the document. (Replaced IEA Section 62).
Section 58. Secondary evidence. - Secondary evidence includes- (a) Certified copies; (b) Copies made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves ensure the accuracy of the copy; (c) Copies made from or compared with the original; (d) Counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them; (e) Oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has himself seen it. (Replaced IEA Section 63).
Section 61. Electronic or digital records. - Nothing in this Adhiniyam shall apply to deny the admissibility of an electronic or digital record in the evidence on the ground that it is an electronic or digital record and such record shall have the same legal effect, validity and enforceability as other document. (Replaced IEA Section 65A).
Section 63. Admissibility of electronic records. - (1) Any information contained in an electronic record which is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic media or cloud storage produced by a computer shall be deemed to be also a document, if the conditions mentioned in this section are satisfied in relation to the information and computer in question and shall be admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or production of the original. (2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of an electronic record shall be the following, namely:- (a) the computer output containing the information was produced by the computer during the period over which the computer was used regularly to store or process information; (b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in the electronic record was regularly fed into the computer; (c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer was operating properly; and (d) the information reproduced in the electronic record reproduces or is derived from such information fed into the computer in the ordinary course of the said activities. (4) In any proceedings where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue of this section, a certificate doing any of the following things, that is to say- (a) identifying the electronic record containing the statement; (b) describing the manner in which it was produced; (c) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that electronic record, and signed by a person in charge of the computer or device, shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate. (Replaced IEA Section 65B).

CHAPTER VII - OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
Section 104. Burden of proof. - Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist. When a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof lies on that person. (Replaced IEA Section 101).
Section 105. On whom burden of proof lies. - The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would fail if no evidence at all were given on either side. (Replaced IEA Section 102).
Section 108. Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exceptions. - When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within any of the General Exceptions in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, is upon him, and the Court shall presume the absence of such circumstances. (Replaced IEA Section 105).
Section 109. Burden of proving fact especially within knowledge. - When any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him. (Replaced IEA Section 106).
Section 121. Estoppel. - When one person has, by his declaration, act or omission, intentionally caused or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither he nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between himself and such person or his representative, to deny the truth of that thing. (Replaced IEA Section 115).

CHAPTER VIII - OF WITNESSES
Section 124. Who may testify. - All persons shall be competent to testify unless the Court considers that they are prevented from understanding the questions put to them, or from giving rational answers to those questions, by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether of body or mind, or any other cause of the same kind. (Replaced IEA Section 118).
Section 132. Professional communications (Privileged communication). - No advocate shall at any time be permitted, unless with his client's express consent, to disclose any communication made to him in the course and for the purpose of his employment as such advocate, by or on behalf of his client. (Replaced IEA Section 126).
