CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY
Section 1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. - (1) This Act may be called the Companies Act, 2013. (2) It extends to the whole of India. (3) This section shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may appoint.
Section 2. Definitions. - In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (20) "company" means a company incorporated under this Act or under any previous company law; (34) "director" means a director appointed to the Board of a company; (47) "independent director" means an independent director referred to in sub-section (6) of section 149; (51) "key managerial personnel", in relation to a company, means- (i) the Chief Executive Officer or the managing director or the manager; (ii) the company secretary; (iii) the whole-time director; (iv) the Chief Financial Officer; (59) "officer" includes any director, manager or key managerial personnel or any person in accordance with whose directions or instructions the Board of Directors is accustomed to act; (60) "officer who is in default", for the purpose of any provision in this Act which enacts that an officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to any penalty or punishment, means any whole-time director, key managerial personnel, or director who was aware of such contravention; (76) "related party", with reference to a company, means- (i) a director or his relative; (ii) a key managerial personnel or his relative; (iii) a firm, in which a director, manager or his relative is a partner; (iv) a private company in which a director or manager is a member or director; (87) "subsidiary company" or "subsidiary", in relation to any other company (that is to say the holding company), means a company in which the holding company controls the composition of the Board of Directors or exercises or controls more than one-half of the total voting power.

CHAPTER II - INCORPORATION OF COMPANY AND MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO
Section 3. Formation of company. - (1) A company may be formed for any lawful purpose by- (a) seven or more persons, where the company to be formed is to be a public company; (b) two or more persons, where the company to be formed is to be a private company; or (c) one person, where the company to be formed is to be a One Person Company.
Section 7. Incorporation of company. - (1) There shall be filed with the Registrar within whose jurisdiction the registered office of a company is proposed to be situated, the memorandum and articles of the company duly signed, a declaration by an advocate or chartered accountant, and an affidavit from each of the subscribers. (5) If any person furnishes any false or incorrect particulars of any information or suppresses any material information, of which he is aware in any of the documents filed with the Registrar in relation to the registration of a company, he shall be liable for action under section 447.
Section 8. Formation of companies with charitable objects, etc. - (1) Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Central Government that a person or an association of persons proposed to be registered under this Act as a limited company- (a) has in its objects the promotion of commerce, art, science, sports, education, research, social welfare, religion, charity, protection of environment or any such other object; (b) intends to apply its profits in promoting its objects; and (c) intends to prohibit the payment of any dividend to its members, the Central Government may issue a licence.

CHAPTER III - PROSPECTUS AND ALLOTMENT OF SECURITIES
Section 34. Criminal liability for misstatements in prospectus. - Where a prospectus, issued, circulated or distributed under this Chapter, includes any statement which is untrue or misleading in form or context in which it is included or where any inclusion or omission of any matter is likely to mislead, every person who authorises the issue of such prospectus shall be liable under section 447: Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person if he proves that such statement or omission was immaterial or that he had reasonable grounds to believe that the statement was true.
Section 35. Civil liability for misstatements in prospectus. - (1) Where a person has subscribed for securities of a company acting on any statement included, or the inclusion or omission of any matter, in the prospectus which is misleading and has sustained any loss or damage as a consequence thereof, the company and every person who is a director, promoter or expert shall, without prejudice to any punishment to which any person may be liable under section 36, be liable to pay compensation to every person who has sustained such loss or damage.

CHAPTER VII - MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 92. Annual return. - (1) Every company shall prepare a return (hereinafter referred to as the annual return) in the prescribed form containing the particulars as they stood on the close of the financial year regarding its registered office, principal business activities, shares, debentures, indebtedness, members, promoters, directors, key managerial personnel, remuneration, meetings of members and Board. (5) If any company fails to file its annual return under sub-section (4), before the expiry of the period specified therein, such company and its every officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty.
Section 96. Annual general meeting. - (1) Every company other than a One Person Company shall in each year hold in addition to any other meetings, a general meeting as its annual general meeting and shall specify the meeting as such in the notices calling it, and not more than fifteen months shall elapse between the date of one annual general meeting of a company and that of the next.

CHAPTER IX - ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES
Section 134. Financial statement, Board's report, etc. - (1) The financial statement, including consolidated financial statement, if any, shall be approved by the Board of Directors before they are signed on behalf of the Board by the chairperson of the company or by two directors out of which one shall be managing director and the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Financial Officer and the company secretary of the company. (3) There shall be attached to statements laid before a company in general meeting, a report by its Board of Directors, which shall include the state of the company's affairs, amounts proposed to carry to reserves, dividend, particulars of loans, guarantees or investments under section 186, particulars of contracts or arrangements referred to in sub-section (1) of section 188, risk management policy, and a directors' responsibility statement. (5) The Directors' Responsibility Statement referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (3) shall state that- (a) in the preparation of the annual accounts, the applicable accounting standards had been followed; (b) the directors had selected such accounting policies and applied them consistently; (c) the directors had taken proper and sufficient care for the maintenance of adequate accounting records for safeguarding the assets of the company and for preventing and detecting fraud and other irregularities. (8) If a company is in default in complying with the provisions of this section, the company shall be liable to a penalty of three lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees.
Section 135. Corporate Social Responsibility. - (1) Every company having net worth of rupees five hundred crore or more, or turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or a net profit of rupees five crore or more during the immediately preceding financial year shall constitute a Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the Board consisting of three or more directors, out of which at least one director shall be an independent director. (5) The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (1), shall ensure that the company spends, in every financial year, at least two per cent of the average net profits of the company made during the three immediately preceding financial years, in pursuance of its Corporate Social Responsibility Policy.

CHAPTER XI - APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF DIRECTORS
Section 149. Company to have Board of Directors. - (1) Every company shall have a Board of Directors consisting of individuals as directors and shall have- (a) a minimum number of three directors in the case of a public company, two directors in the case of a private company, and one director in the case of a One Person Company; and (b) a maximum of fifteen directors: Provided that a company may appoint more than fifteen directors after passing a special resolution: Provided further that such class or classes of companies as may be prescribed, shall have at least one woman director. (4) Every listed public company shall have at least one-third of the total number of directors as independent directors.
Section 164. Disqualifications for appointment of director. - (1) A person shall not be eligible for appointment as a director of a company if- (a) he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; (b) he is an undischarged insolvent; (c) he has applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent and his application is pending; (d) he has been convicted by a court of any offence, whether involving moral turpitude or otherwise, and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months and a period of five years has not elapsed from the date of expiry of the sentence; (g) he has been convicted of the offence dealing with related party transactions under section 188 at any time during the last preceding five years. (2) No person who is or has been a director of a company which has not filed financial statements or annual returns for any continuous period of three financial years shall be eligible to be re-appointed as a director of that company or appointed in other company for a period of five years.
Section 166. Duties of directors. - (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a director of a company shall act in accordance with the articles of the company. (2) A director of a company shall act in good faith in order to promote the objects of the company for the benefit of its members as a whole, and in the best interests of the company, its employees, the shareholders, the community and for the protection of environment. (3) A director of a company shall exercise his duties with due and reasonable care, skill and diligence and shall exercise independent judgment. (4) A director of a company shall not involve in a situation in which he may have a direct or indirect interest that conflicts, or possibly may conflict, with the interest of the company. (5) A director of a company shall not achieve or attempt to achieve any undue gain or advantage either to himself or to his relatives, partners, or associates and if such director is found guilty of making any undue gain, he shall be liable to pay an amount equal to that gain to the company. (6) A director of a company shall not assign his office and any assignment so made shall be void. (7) If a director of the company contravenes the provisions of this section such director shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.

CHAPTER XII - MEETINGS OF BOARD AND ITS POWERS
Section 173. Meetings of Board. - (1) Every company shall hold the first meeting of the Board of Directors within thirty days of the date of its incorporation and thereafter hold a minimum number of four meetings of its Board of Directors every year in such a manner that not more than one hundred and twenty days shall elapse between two consecutive meetings of the Board.
Section 177. Audit Committee. - (1) The Board of Directors of every listed public company and such other class or classes of companies as may be prescribed, shall constitute an Audit Committee. (2) The Audit Committee shall consist of a minimum of three directors with independent directors forming a majority. (4) Every Audit Committee shall act in accordance with the terms of reference specified in writing by the Board which shall, inter alia, include- (i) the recommendation for appointment, remuneration and terms of appointment of auditors; (ii) review and monitor the auditor's independence and performance; (iii) examination of the financial statement and the auditors' report thereon; (iv) evaluation of internal financial controls and risk management systems.
Section 184. Disclosure of interest by director. - (1) Every director shall at the first meeting of the Board in which he participates as a director and thereafter at the first meeting of the Board in every financial year disclose his concern or interest in any company or companies or bodies corporate, firms, or other association of individuals. (2) Every director of a company who is in any way, whether directly or indirectly, concerned or interested in a contract or arrangement or proposed contract or arrangement entered into or to be entered into with a body corporate in which such director holds more than two per cent shareholding or is a promoter, manager, Chief Executive Officer, or with a firm in which such director is a partner, shall disclose the nature of his concern or interest at the meeting of the Board in which the contract or arrangement is discussed and shall not participate in such meeting. (4) If a director of the company contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), such director shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees.
Section 188. Related party transactions. - (1) Except with the consent of the Board of Directors given by a resolution at a meeting of the Board and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, no company shall enter into any contract or arrangement with a related party with respect to- (a) sale, purchase or supply of any goods or materials; (b) selling or otherwise disposing of, or buying, property of any kind; (c) leasing of property of any kind; (d) availing or rendering of any services; (e) appointment of any agent for purchase or sale of goods, materials, services or property; (f) such related party's appointment to any office or place of profit in the company, its subsidiary company or associate company. (3) Where any contract or arrangement is entered into by a director or any other employee, without obtaining the consent of the Board or approval by a resolution in the general meeting and if it is not ratified by the Board or, as the case may be, by the shareholders at a meeting within three months from the date on which such contract or arrangement was entered into, such contract or arrangement shall be voidable at the option of the Board or, as the case may be, of the shareholders. (5) Any director or any other employee of a company, who had entered into or authorised the contract or arrangement in violation of the provisions of this section shall- (i) in case of listed company, be liable to a penalty of twenty-five lakh rupees; and (ii) in case of any other company, be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees.

CHAPTER XVI - PREVENTION OF OPPRESSION AND MISMANAGEMENT
Section 241. Application to Tribunal for relief in cases of oppression, etc. - (1) Any member of a company who complains that- (a) the affairs of the company have been or are being conducted in a manner prejudicial to public interest or in a manner prejudicial or oppressive to him or any other member or members or in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the company; or (b) the material change has taken place in the management or control of the company, may apply to the Tribunal for an order under this Chapter.
Section 242. Powers of Tribunal. - (1) If, on any application made under section 241, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the company's affairs have been or are being conducted in a manner prejudicial or oppressive to any member or members or prejudicial to public interest, and that to wind up the company would unfairly prejudice such member or members, but that otherwise the facts would justify the making of a winding-up order on the ground that it was just and equitable that the company should be wound up, the Tribunal may, with a view to bringing to an end the matters complained of, make such order as it thinks fit.

CHAPTER XXIX - MISCELLANEOUS
Section 447. Punishment for fraud. - Without prejudice to any liability including repayment of any debt under this Act, to any other person, any person who is found to be guilty of fraud involving an amount of at least ten lakh rupees or one per cent of the turnover of the company, whichever is lower, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than the amount involved in the fraud, but which may extend to three times the amount involved in the fraud: Provided that where the fraud in question involves public interest, the term of imprisonment shall not be less than three years. Explanation.- For the purposes of this section "fraud" in relation to affairs of a company or any body corporate, includes any act, omission, concealment of any fact or abuse of position committed by any person or any other person with the connivance in any manner, with intent to deceive, to gain undue advantage from, or to injure the interests of, the company or its shareholders or its creditors or any other person, whether or not there is any wrongful gain or wrongful loss.
Section 448. Punishment for false statement. - Save as otherwise provided in this Act, if in any return, report, certificate, financial statement, prospectus, statement or other document required by, or for, the purposes of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, any person makes a statement- (a) which is false in any material particulars, knowing it to be false; or (b) which omits any material fact, knowing it to be material, he shall be liable under section 447.
Section 449. Punishment for false evidence. - Save as otherwise provided in this Act, if any person gives false evidence upon any examination on oath or solemn affirmation, authorized under this Act, or in any affidavit, deposition or solemn affirmation, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
Section 450. Punishment where no specific penalty or punishment is provided. - If a company or any officer of a company or any other person contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, and for which no penalty or punishment is provided elsewhere in this Act, the company and every officer of the company who is in default or such other person shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees, and in case of continuing contravention, with a further penalty of one thousand rupees for each day after the first during which the contravention continues.
