CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY
Section 1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. - (1) This Act may be called the Consumer Protection Act, 2019. (2) It extends to the whole of India. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may appoint. (4) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the Central Government by notification, this Act shall apply to all goods and services.
Section 2. Definitions. - In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (6) "complainant" means- (i) a consumer; or (ii) any voluntary consumer association; or (iii) the Central Government or any State Government; or (iv) the Central Authority; (7) "consumer" means any person who- (i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised, and includes any user of such goods when such use is made with the approval of such person, but does not include a person who obtains such goods for resale or for any commercial purpose; or (ii) hires or avails of any service for a consideration; Explanation.- The expression "buys any goods" and "hires or avails any services" includes offline or online transactions through electronic means or by teleshopping or direct selling or multi-level marketing; (10) "defect" means any fault, imperfection or shortcoming in the quality, quantity, potency, purity or standard which is required to be maintained by or under any law; (11) "deficiency" means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or under any law; (16) "e-commerce" means buying or selling of digital or physical goods or services including digital products over digital or electronic network; (28) "misleading advertisement" in relation to any product or service, means an advertisement, which- (i) falsely describes such product or service; or (ii) gives a false guarantee to, or is likely to mislead the consumers as to the nature, substance, quantity or quality of such product or service; (34) "product liability" means the responsibility of a product manufacturer or product seller, of any product or service, to compensate for any harm caused to a consumer by such defective product manufactured or sold or by deficiency in services relating thereto; (46) "unfair contract" means a contract between a manufacturer or trader and a consumer having terms which cause significant change in the rights of such consumer; (47) "unfair trade practice" means a trade practice which, for the purpose of promoting the sale, use or supply of any goods or for the provision of any service, adopts any unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice including making false or misleading representations.

CHAPTER III - CENTRAL CONSUMER PROTECTION AUTHORITY
Section 10. Establishment of Central Consumer Protection Authority. - (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an authority to be known as the Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA) to regulate matters relating to violation of rights of consumers, unfair trade practices and false or misleading advertisements which are prejudicial to the interests of public and consumers.
Section 18. Powers and functions of Central Authority. - (1) The Central Authority shall- (a) protect, promote and enforce the rights of consumers as a class, and prevent violations of consumers rights under this Act; (b) prevent unfair trade practices and ensure that no person engages himself in unfair trade practices; (c) ensure that no false or misleading advertisement is made; (d) ensure that no person takes part in the publication of any advertisement which is false or misleading. (2) The Central Authority may inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made into violations of consumer rights.
Section 20. Power of Central Authority to recall goods, etc. - Where the Central Authority is satisfied on the basis of investigation that there is sufficient evidence to show violation of consumer rights or unfair trade practice, it may pass such order as may be necessary, including- (a) recalling of goods or withdrawal of services which are dangerous, hazardous or unsafe; (b) reimbursement of the prices of goods or services so recalled to purchasers; and (c) discontinuation of practices which are unfair and prejudicial to consumers' interest.
Section 21. Power of Central Authority to issue directions and penalties against false or misleading advertisements. - (1) Where the Central Authority is satisfied after investigation that any advertisement is false or misleading and is prejudicial to the interest of any consumer or is in contravention of consumer rights, it may, by order, issue directions to the concerned trader or manufacturer or endorser or advertiser or publisher to discontinue such advertisement or to modify the same. (2) The Central Authority may impose on any manufacturer or endorser a penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees, and for every subsequent contravention by a manufacturer, a penalty which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.

CHAPTER IV - CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION
Section 28. Establishment of District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. - (1) The State Government shall, by notification, establish a District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, to be known as the District Commission, in each district of the State.
Section 34. Jurisdiction of District Commission. - (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the District Commission shall have jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as consideration does not exceed fifty lakh rupees (or such amount as may be prescribed by the Central Government).
Section 35. Manner in which complaint shall be made. - (1) A complaint, in relation to any goods sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or any service provided or agreed to be provided, may be filed with a District Commission by- (a) the consumer; (b) any recognized consumer association; (c) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having the same interest; (d) the Central Government, the Central Authority or the State Government.
Section 39. Findings of District Commission. - (1) Where the District Commission is satisfied that the goods complained against suffer from any of the defects specified in the complaint, or that any of the allegations contained in the complaint about the services or any unfair trade practices are proved, it shall issue an order to the opposite party directing him to do one or more of the following things, namely:- (a) to remove the defect; (b) to replace the goods with new goods of similar description; (c) to return to the complainant the price, or, as the case may be, the charges paid by the complainant; (d) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation to the consumer for any loss or injury suffered by the consumer due to the negligence of the opposite party.
Section 47. Jurisdiction of State Commission. - (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the State Commission shall have jurisdiction to entertain- (a) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as consideration exceeds fifty lakh rupees, but does not exceed two crore rupees; (b) appeals against the orders of any District Commission within the State.
Section 58. Jurisdiction of National Commission. - (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the National Commission shall have jurisdiction to entertain- (a) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as consideration exceeds two crore rupees; (b) appeals against the orders of any State Commission.

CHAPTER VI - PRODUCT LIABILITY
Section 82. Application of Chapter. - This Chapter shall apply to every claim for product liability made in a product liability action for harm caused by or resulting from any product or service.
Section 83. Product liability action. - A product liability action may be brought by a complainant against a product manufacturer or a product service provider or a product seller, as the case may be, for harm caused to him on account of a defective product.
Section 84. Liability of product manufacturer. - (1) A product manufacturer shall be liable in a product liability action, if- (a) the product contains a manufacturing defect; or (b) the product is defective in design; or (c) there is a deviation from manufacturing specifications; or (d) the product does not conform to the express warranty; or (e) the product fails to contain adequate instructions of correct usage to prevent any harm or any warning regarding improper or incorrect usage.
Section 85. Liability of product service provider. - A product service provider shall be liable in a product liability action, if- (a) the service provided by him was faulty, imperfect, deficient or inadequate in quality, nature or manner of performance; or (b) there was an act of omission or commission or negligence or conscious withholding any information which caused harm; or (c) the service provider did not conform to express warranty or terms and conditions of contract.
Section 86. Liability of product seller. - A product seller who is not a product manufacturer shall be liable in a product liability action, if- (a) he has exercised substantial control over designing, testing, manufacturing, packaging or labelling of a product that caused harm; or (b) he has altered or modified the product and such alteration or modification was the substantial factor in causing the harm; or (c) he has failed to exercise reasonable care in assembling, inspecting or maintaining such product.
Section 87. Exceptions to product liability action. - (1) A product liability action cannot be brought against the product seller if, at the time of harm, the product was misused, altered, or modified. (2) A product manufacturer shall not be liable for failure to instruct or warn if the product was purchased by an employer for use at the workplace and employer knew about warnings, or product was obvious danger.

CHAPTER VII - OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Section 88. Penalty for non-compliance of direction of Central Authority. - Whoever, fails to comply with any direction of the Central Authority under sections 20 and 21, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to twenty lakh rupees, or with both.
Section 89. Punishment for false or misleading advertisement. - Any manufacturer or service provider who causes a false or misleading advertisement to be made which is prejudicial to the interest of consumers shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees; and for every subsequent offence, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.
