CHAPTER I - OF THE COMMUNICATION, ACCEPTANCE AND REVOCATION OF PROPOSALS
Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement. - This Act may be called the Indian Contract Act, 1872. It extends to the whole of India; and it came into force on the first day of September, 1872.
Section 2. Interpretation-clause. - In this Act the following words and expressions are used in the following senses, unless a contrary intention appears from the context:- (a) When one person signifies to another his willingness to do or to abstain from doing anything, with a view to obtaining the assent of that other to such act or abstinence, he is said to make a proposal; (b) When the person to whom the proposal is made signifies his assent thereto, the proposal is said to be accepted. A proposal, when accepted, becomes a promise; (c) The person making the proposal is called the "promisor", and the person accepting the proposal is called the "promisee"; (d) When, at the desire of the promisor, the promisee or any other person has done or abstained from doing, or does or abstains from doing, or promises to do or to abstain from doing, something, such act or abstinence or promise is called a consideration for the promise; (e) Every promise and every set of promises, forming the consideration for each other, is an agreement; (g) An agreement not enforceable by law is said to be void; (h) An agreement enforceable by law is a contract; (i) An agreement which is enforceable by law at the option of one or more of the parties thereto, but not at the option of the other or others, is a voidable contract; (j) A contract which ceases to be enforceable by law becomes void when it ceases to be enforceable.
Section 3. Communication, acceptance and revocation of proposals. - The communication of proposals, the acceptance of proposals, and the revocation of proposals and acceptances, respectively, are deemed to be made by any act or omission of the party proposing, accepting or revoking, by which he intends to communicate such proposal, acceptance or revocation, or which has the effect of communicating it.
Section 4. Communication when complete. - The communication of a proposal is complete when it comes to the knowledge of the person to whom it is made. The communication of an acceptance is complete- as against the promisor, when it is put in a course of transmission to him so as to be out of the power of the acceptor; as against the acceptor, when it comes to the knowledge of the promisor. The communication of a revocation is complete- as against the person who makes it, when it is put into a course of transmission to the person to whom it is made; as against the person to whom it is made, when it comes to his knowledge.
Section 5. Revocation of proposals and acceptances. - A proposal may be revoked at any time before the communication of its acceptance is complete as against the promisor, but not afterwards. An acceptance may be revoked at any time before the communication of the acceptance is complete as against the acceptor, but not afterwards.

CHAPTER II - OF CONTRACTS, VOIDABLE CONTRACTS AND VOID AGREEMENTS
Section 10. What agreements are contracts. - All agreements are contracts if they are made by the free consent of parties competent to contract, for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object, and are not hereby expressly declared to be void.
Section 11. Who are competent to contract. - Every person is competent to contract who is of the age of majority according to the law to which he is subject, and who is of sound mind and is not disqualified from contracting by any law to which he is subject.
Section 13. "Consent" defined. - Two or more persons are said to consent when they agree upon the same thing in the same sense (Consensus ad idem).
Section 14. "Free consent" defined. - Consent is said to be free when it is not caused by- (1) coercion, as defined in section 15, or (2) undue influence, as defined in section 16, or (3) fraud, as defined in section 17, or (4) misrepresentation, as defined in section 18, or (5) mistake, subject to the provisions of sections 20, 21 and 22. Consent is said to be so caused when it would not have been given but for the existence of such coercion, undue influence, fraud, misrepresentation or mistake.
Section 15. "Coercion" defined. - "Coercion" is the committing, or threatening to commit, any act forbidden by the Indian Penal Code (or Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023), or the unlawful detaining, or threatening to detain, any property, to the prejudice of any person whatever, with the intention of causing any person to enter into an agreement.
Section 16. "Undue influence" defined. - (1) A contract is said to be induced by "undue influence" where the relations subsisting between the parties are such that one of the parties is in a position to dominate the will of the other and uses that position to obtain an unfair advantage over the other. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing principle, a person is deemed to be in a position to dominate the will of another- (a) where he holds a real or apparent authority over the other, or where he stands in a fiduciary relation to the other; or (b) where he makes a contract with a person whose mental capacity is temporarily or permanently affected by reason of age, illness, or mental or bodily distress.
Section 17. "Fraud" defined. - "Fraud" means and includes any of the following acts committed by a party to a contract, or with his connivance, or by his agent, with intent to deceive another party thereto or his agent, or to induce him to enter into the contract:- (1) the suggestion, as a fact, of that which is not true, by one who does not believe it to be true; (2) the active concealment of a fact by one having knowledge or belief of the fact; (3) a promise made without any intention of performing it; (4) any other act fitted to deceive; (5) any such act or omission as the law specially declares to be fraudulent. Explanation.- Mere silence as to facts likely to affect the willingness of a person to enter into a contract is not fraud, unless the circumstances of the case are such that it is the duty of the person keeping silence to speak, or unless his silence is, in itself, equivalent to speech.
Section 18. "Misrepresentation" defined. - "Misrepresentation" means and includes- (1) the positive assertion, in a manner not warranted by the information of the person making it, of that which is not true, though he believes it to be true; (2) any breach of duty which, without an intent to deceive, gains an advantage to the person committing it, or any one claiming under him, by misleading another to his prejudice, or to the prejudice of any one claiming under him; (3) causing, however innocently, a party to an agreement, to make a mistake as to the substance of the thing which is the subject of the agreement.
Section 19. Voidability of agreements without free consent. - When consent to an agreement is caused by coercion, fraud or misrepresentation, the agreement is a contract voidable at the option of the party whose consent was so caused.
Section 20. Agreement void where both parties are under mistake as to matter of fact. - Where both the parties to an agreement are under a mistake as to a matter of fact essential to the agreement, the agreement is void.
Section 23. What considerations and objects are lawful, and what not. - The consideration or object of an agreement is lawful, unless- it is forbidden by law; or is of such a nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any law; or is fraudulent; or involves or implies injury to the person or property of another; or the Court regards it as immoral, or opposed to public policy. In each of these cases, the consideration or object of an agreement is said to be unlawful. Every agreement of which the object or consideration is unlawful is void.
Section 25. Agreement without consideration, void, unless it is in writing and registered or is a promise to compensate for something done or is a promise to pay a debt barred by limitation law. - An agreement made without consideration is void, unless- (1) it is expressed in writing and registered under the law for the time being in force for the registration of documents, and is made on account of natural love and affection between parties standing in a near relation to each other; or (2) it is a promise to compensate, wholly or in part, a person who has already voluntarily done something for the promisor; or (3) it is a promise, made in writing and signed by the person to be charged therewith, to pay wholly or in part a debt of which the creditor might have enforced payment but for the law for the limitation of suits.
Section 27. Agreement in restraint of trade, void. - Every agreement by which any one is restrained from exercising a lawful profession, trade or business of any kind, is to that extent void. Exception 1.- One who sells the goodwill of a business may agree with the buyer to refrain from carrying on a similar business, within specified local limits, so long as the buyer carries on a like business therein.
Section 28. Agreements in restraint of legal proceedings, void. - Every agreement, by which any party thereto is restricted absolutely from enforcing his rights under or in respect of any contract, by the usual legal proceedings in the ordinary tribunals, or which limits the time within which he may thus enforce his rights, is void to that extent. Exception 1.- This section shall not render illegal a contract, by which two or more persons agree that any dispute which may arise between them shall be referred to arbitration.

CHAPTER IV - OF THE PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS
Section 37. Obligation of parties to contracts. - The parties to a contract must either perform, or offer to perform, their respective promises, unless such performance is dispensed with or excused under the provisions of this Act, or of any other law.
Section 56. Agreement to do impossible act (Doctrine of Frustration). - An agreement to do an act impossible in itself is void. A contract to do an act which, after the contract is made, becomes impossible, or, by reason of some event which the promisor could not prevent, unlawful, becomes void when the act becomes impossible or unlawful. Where one person has promised to do something which he knew, or, with reasonable diligence, might have known, and which the promisee did not know, to be impossible or unlawful, such promisor must make compensation to such promisee for any loss which such promisee sustains through the non-performance of the promise.
Section 62. Effect of novation, rescission, and alteration of contract. - If the parties to a contract agree to substitute a new contract for it, or to rescind or alter it, the original contract need not be performed.
Section 65. Obligation of person who has received advantage under void agreement, or contract that becomes void. - When an agreement is discovered to be void, or when a contract becomes void, any person who has received any advantage under such agreement or contract is bound to restore it, or to make compensation for it to the person from whom he received it.

CHAPTER V - OF CERTAIN RELATIONS RESEMBLING THOSE CREATED BY CONTRACT (QUASI-CONTRACTS)
Section 70. Obligation of person enjoying benefit of non-gratuitous act. - Where a person lawfully does anything for another person, or delivers anything to him, not intending to do so gratuitously, and such other person enjoys the benefit thereof, the latter is bound to make compensation to the former in respect of, or to restore, the thing so done or delivered.
Section 72. Liability of person to whom money is paid, or thing delivered, by mistake or under coercion. - A person to whom money has been paid, or anything delivered, by mistake or under coercion, must repay or return it.

CHAPTER VI - OF THE CONSEQUENCES OF BREACH OF CONTRACT
Section 73. Compensation for loss or damage caused by breach of contract. - When a contract has been broken, the party who suffers by such breach is entitled to receive, from the party who has broken the contract, compensation for any loss or damage caused to him thereby, which naturally arose in the usual course of things from such breach, or which the parties knew, when they made the contract, to be likely to result from the breach of it. Such compensation is not to be given for any remote and indirect loss or damage sustained by reason of the breach. (Rule in Hadley v. Baxendale).
Section 74. Compensation for breach of contract where penalty stipulated for (Liquidated Damages). - When a contract has been broken, if a sum is named in the contract as the amount to be paid in case of such breach, or if the contract contains any other stipulation by way of penalty, the party complaining of the breach is entitled, whether or not actual damage or loss is proved to have been caused thereby, to receive from the party who has broken the contract reasonable compensation not exceeding the amount so named or, as the case may be, the penalty stipulated for.
Section 75. Party rightfully rescinding contract, entitled to compensation. - A person who rightfully rescinds a contract is entitled to compensation for any damage which he has sustained through the non-fulfilment of the contract.

CHAPTER VIII - OF INDEMNITY AND GUARANTEE
Section 124. "Contract of indemnity" defined. - A contract by which one party promises to save the other from loss caused to him by the conduct of the promisor himself, or by the conduct of any other person, is called a "contract of indemnity".
Section 126. "Contract of guarantee", "surety", "principal debtor" and "creditor". - A "contract of guarantee" is a contract to perform the promise, or discharge the liability, of a third person in case of his default. The person who gives the guarantee is called the "surety"; the person in respect of whose default the guarantee is given is called the "principal debtor", and the person to whom the guarantee is given is called the "creditor". A guarantee may be either oral or written.
Section 128. Surety's liability. - The liability of the surety is co-extensive with that of the principal debtor, unless it is otherwise provided by the contract.

CHAPTER IX - OF BAILMENT
Section 148. "Bailment", "bailor" and "bailee" defined. - A "bailment" is the delivery of goods by one person to another for some purpose, upon a contract that they shall, when the purpose is accomplished, be returned or otherwise disposed of according to the directions of the person delivering them. The person delivering the goods is called the "bailor". The person to whom they are delivered is called the "bailee".
Section 151. Care to be taken by bailee. - In all cases of bailment the bailee is bound to take as much care of the goods bailed to him as a man of ordinary prudence would, under similar circumstances, take of his own goods of the same bulk, quality and value as the goods bailed.

CHAPTER X - AGENCY
Section 182. "Agent" and "principal" defined. - An "agent" is a person employed to do any act for another, or to represent another in dealings with third persons. The person for whom such act is done, or who is so represented, is called the "principal".
Section 201. Termination of agency. - An agency is terminated by the principal revoking his authority; or by the agent renouncing the business of the agency; or by the business of the agency being completed; or by either the principal or agent dying or becoming of unsound mind; or by the principal being adjudicated an insolvent under the provisions of any Act for the time being in force for the relief of insolvent debtors.
