CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY
Section 1. Short title and commencement. - (1) This Act may be called the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Section 2. Definitions. - In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (h) "Data Fiduciary" means any person who alone or in conjunction with other persons determines the purpose and means of processing of personal data; (i) "Data Principal" means the individual to whom the personal data relates and where such individual is- (i) a child, includes the parents or lawful guardian; (ii) a person with disability, includes her lawful guardian; (j) "Data Processor" means any person who processes personal data on behalf of a Data Fiduciary; (t) "personal data" means any data about an individual who is identifiable by or in relation to such data; (u) "personal data breach" means any unauthorised processing of personal data or accidental disclosure, acquisition, sharing, use, alteration, destruction or loss of access to personal data, that compromises the confidentiality, integrity or availability of personal data; (x) "processing" in relation to personal data, means a wholly or partly automated operation or set of operations performed on digital personal data, and includes operations such as collection, recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation, retrieval, use, alignment or combination, indexing, sharing, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise making available, restriction, erasure or destruction; (z) "Significant Data Fiduciary" means any Data Fiduciary or class of Data Fiduciaries as may be notified by the Central Government under section 10.
Section 3. Application of Act. - Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall apply to the processing of digital personal data within the territory of India where the personal data is collected in digital form or in non-digital form and digitized subsequently, and applies also outside India if in connection with offering goods or services to Data Principals in India.

CHAPTER II - OBLIGATIONS OF DATA FIDUCIARY
Section 4. Grounds for processing personal data. - (1) A person may process the personal data of a Data Principal only in accordance with the provisions of this Act and for a lawful purpose- (a) for which the Data Principal has given her consent; or (b) for certain legitimate uses.
Section 5. Notice. - (1) Every request for consent under this Act shall be accompanied or preceded by a notice given by the Data Fiduciary to the Data Principal, in such manner as may be prescribed, informing her of- (i) the personal data sought to be processed and the purpose of processing; (ii) the manner in which she may exercise her rights under section 11, 12, 13; and (iii) the manner in which she may make a complaint to the Board.
Section 6. Consent. - (1) The consent given by the Data Principal shall be free, specific, informed, unconditional and unambiguous with a clear affirmative action, and shall signify an agreement to the processing of her personal data for the specified purpose. (4) Where consent given by the Data Principal is the basis of processing of personal data, such Data Principal shall have the right to withdraw her consent at any time.
Section 7. Certain legitimate uses. - A Data Fiduciary may process personal data of a Data Principal for specified legitimate uses, including voluntary provision of data by Data Principal without objection, state subsidies and benefits, legal obligations, compliance with judgments or orders, medical emergencies, disasters or breakdown of public order, and employment purposes.
Section 8. General obligations of Data Fiduciary. - (1) A Data Fiduciary shall, irrespective of any agreement to the contrary or trade practice, be responsible for complying with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. (5) A Data Fiduciary shall protect personal data in its possession or under its control by taking reasonable security safeguards to prevent personal data breach. (6) In the event of a personal data breach, the Data Fiduciary shall give the Board and each affected Data Principal intimation of such breach in such form and manner as may be prescribed. (7) A Data Fiduciary shall erase personal data upon the Data Principal withdrawing consent, or as soon as it is reasonable to assume that the specified purpose is no longer being served.
Section 9. Processing of personal data of children. - (1) The Data Fiduciary shall, before processing any personal data of a child or a person with disability, obtain verifiable consent of the parent of such child or the lawful guardian. (2) A Data Fiduciary shall not undertake such processing of personal data that is likely to cause any detrimental effect on the well-being of a child. (3) A Data Fiduciary shall not undertake tracking or behavioural monitoring of children or targeted advertising directed at children.
Section 10. Additional obligations of Significant Data Fiduciary. - (1) The Central Government may notify any Data Fiduciary or class of Data Fiduciaries as Significant Data Fiduciary on the basis of volume and sensitivity of personal data, risk to the rights of Data Principal, impact on sovereignty and integrity of India. (2) The Significant Data Fiduciary shall- (a) appoint a Data Protection Officer based in India; (b) appoint an independent data auditor to carry out data audit; (c) undertake Periodic Data Protection Impact Assessment.

CHAPTER III - RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF DATA PRINCIPAL
Section 11. Right to access information about personal data. - (1) The Data Principal shall have the right to obtain from the Data Fiduciary to whom she has previously given consent- (a) a summary of personal data which is being processed by such Data Fiduciary; (b) the identities of all other Data Fiduciaries and Data Processors with whom the personal data has been shared.
Section 12. Right to correction and erasure of personal data. - (1) A Data Principal shall have the right to correction, completion, updating and erasure of her personal data for the processing of which she has previously given consent.
Section 13. Right of grievance redressal. - (1) A Data Principal shall have the right to have readily available means of grievance redressal provided by a Data Fiduciary or Consent Manager in respect of any act or omission of such Data Fiduciary.
Section 14. Right to nominate. - (1) A Data Principal shall have the right to nominate, in such manner as may be prescribed, any other individual, who shall, in the event of death or incapacity of the Data Principal, exercise the rights of the Data Principal.
Section 15. Duties of Data Principal. - A Data Principal shall comply with the provisions of all applicable laws, not impersonate another person, not suppress any material information, and not register a false or frivolous grievance or complaint.

CHAPTER V - DATA PROTECTION BOARD OF INDIA
Section 18. Establishment of Board. - (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may appoint, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act a Board to be called the Data Protection Board of India.
Section 27. Powers and functions of Board. - (1) The Board shall exercise and perform the following powers and functions, namely:- (a) on receipt of an intimation of personal data breach under sub-section (6) of section 8, to direct any urgent remedial or mitigation measures and inquire into such personal data breach; (b) on a complaint made by a Data Principal, to inquire into breaches of obligations under this Act; (c) to impose financial penalties specified in the Schedule.

CHAPTER VII - PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION
Section 33. Financial penalties. - (1) If the Board determines on conclusion of an inquiry that non-compliance by a person is significant, it may, after giving the person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, impose such financial penalty as specified in the Schedule. Breach of obligations under sub-section (5) of section 8 (failure to take reasonable security safeguards to prevent personal data breach): Penalty up to two hundred and fifty crore rupees. Breach in observing obligations to give Board or affected Data Principal notice of personal data breach under sub-section (6) of section 8: Penalty up to two hundred crore rupees. Breach in observance of additional obligations in relation to children under section 9: Penalty up to two hundred crore rupees. Breach in observance of additional obligations of Significant Data Fiduciary under section 10: Penalty up to one hundred and fifty crore rupees. Breach in observance of duties of Data Principal under section 15: Penalty up to ten thousand rupees.
