CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY
Section 1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. - (1) This Act may be called the Information Technology Act, 2000. (2) It shall extend to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to any offence or contravention thereunder committed outside India by any person. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may appoint.
Section 2. Definitions. - (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "access" with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means gaining entry into, instructing or communicating with the logical, arithmetical, or memory function resources of a computer, computer system or computer network; (i) "computer" means any electronic, magnetic, optical or other high-speed data processing device or system which performs logical, arithmetic, and memory functions by manipulations of electronic, magnetic or optical impulses, and includes all input, output, processing, storage, computer software, or communication facilities which are connected or related to the computer in a computer system or computer network; (j) "computer network" means the inter-connection of one or more computers or computer systems through- (i) the use of satellite, terrestrial line, wire, wireless or other communication media; (o) "data" means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions which are being prepared or have been prepared in a formalised manner, and is intended to be processed in a computer system or computer network; (t) "electronic record" means data, record or data generated, image or sound stored, received or sent in an electronic form or micro film or computer generated micro fiche; (w) "intermediary" with respect to any particular electronic records, means any person who on behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any service with respect to that record and includes telecom service providers, network service providers, internet service providers, web-hosting service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online-auction sites, online-market places and cyber cafes.

CHAPTER II - DIGITAL SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE
Section 3. Authentication of electronic records. - (1) Subject to the provisions of this section any subscriber may authenticate an electronic record by affixing his digital signature. (2) The authentication of the electronic record shall be effected by the use of asymmetric crypto system and hash function.
Section 4. Legal recognition of electronic records. - Where any law provides that information or any other matter shall be in writing or in the typewritten or printed form, then, notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such information or matter is- (a) rendered or made available in an electronic form; and (b) accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent reference.
Section 5. Legal recognition of electronic signatures. - Where any law provides that information or any other matter shall be authenticated by affixing the signature or any document shall be signed or bear the signature of any person, then, notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such information or matter is authenticated by means of digital signature or electronic signature.

CHAPTER III - ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE
Section 10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means. - Where in a contract formation, the communication of proposals, the acceptance of proposals, the revocation of proposals and acceptances, as the case may be, are expressed in electronic form or by means of an electronic record, such contract shall not be deemed to be unenforceable solely on the ground that such electronic form or means was used for that purpose.

CHAPTER IX - PENALTIES, COMPENSATION AND ADJUDICATION
Section 43. Penalty and compensation for damage to computer, computer system, etc. - If any person without permission of the owner or any other person who is in charge of a computer, computer system or computer network,- (a) accesses or secures access to such computer, computer system or computer network; (b) downloads, copies or extracts any data, computer data base or information from such computer; (c) introduces or causes to be introduced any computer contaminant or computer virus into any computer; (d) damages or causes to be damaged any computer, computer data base or any other programmes; (e) disrupts or causes disruption of any computer, computer system or computer network; (f) denies or causes the denial of access to any person authorised to access any computer; (g) provides any assistance to any person to facilitate access to a computer in contravention of the provisions of this Act; (h) charges the services availed of by a person to the account of another person by tampering with or manipulating any computer; (i) destroys, deletes or alters any information residing in a computer resource or diminishes its value or utility; (j) steals, conceals, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal, conceal, destroy or alter any computer source code, he shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation to the person so affected.
Section 43A. Compensation for failure to protect data. - Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or handling any sensitive personal data or information in a computer resource which it owns, controls or operates, is negligent in implementing and maintaining reasonable security practices and procedures and thereby causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person, such body corporate shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation to the person so affected.
Section 45. Residuary penalty. - Whoever convenes any contravention of any of the rules or regulations made under this Act, for which no penalty has been separately provided, shall be liable to pay a penalty not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees or to pay compensation not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees to the person affected by such contravention.

CHAPTER XI - OFFENCES
Section 65. Tampering with computer source documents. - Whoever knowingly or intentionally conceals, destroys or alters or intentionally or knowingly causes another to conceal, destroy, or alter any computer source code used for a computer, computer programme, computer system or computer network, when the computer source code is required to be kept or maintained by law for the time being in force, shall be punishable with imprisonment up to three years, or with fine which may extend up to two lakh rupees, or with both.
Section 66. Computer related offences. - If any person, dishonestly or fraudulently, does any act referred to in section 43, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
Section 66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication device. - Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen computer resource or communication device knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen computer resource or communication device, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
Section 66C. Punishment for identity theft. - Whoever, fraudulently or dishonestly make use of the electronic signature, password or any other unique identification feature of any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine with may extend to rupees one lakh.
Section 66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource. - Whoever, by means of any communication device or computer resource cheats by personation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
Section 66E. Punishment for violation of privacy. - Whoever, intentionally or knowingly captures, publishes or transmits the image of a private area of any person without his or her consent, under circumstances violating the privacy of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine not exceeding two lakh rupees, or with both.
Section 66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism. - (1) Whoever- (A) with intent to threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or to strike terror in the people or any section of the people by- (i) denying or causing the denial of access to any person authorized to access computer resource; or (ii) attempting to penetrate or access a computer resource without authorisation or exceeding authorised access; or (iii) introducing or causing to introduce any computer contaminant, and by means of such conduct causes or is likely to cause death or injuries to persons or damage to or destruction of property or disrupts the supply of services essential to the life of the community; or (B) knowingly or intentionally accesses a computer resource without authorisation and obtains access to information, data or computer database that is restricted for reasons of the security of the State, commits the offence of cyber terrorism. (2) Whoever commits or conspires to commit cyber terrorism shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to imprisonment for life.
Section 67. Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form. - Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the electronic form, any material which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
Section 67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act, etc., in electronic form. - Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the electronic form any material which contains sexually explicit act or conduct shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
Section 69. Powers to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any information through any computer resource. - (1) Where the Central Government or a State Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the interest of the sovereignty or integrity of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order, it may direct any agency to intercept, monitor or decrypt or cause to be intercepted or monitored or decrypted any information generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer resource. (2) The subscriber or intermediary or any person in charge of the computer resource shall extend all facilities and technical assistance.
Section 69A. Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of any information through any computer resource. - (1) Where the Central Government or any of its officers specially authorised by it in this behalf is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order, it may, by order, direct any agency of the Government or intermediary to block for access by the public or cause to be blocked for access by the public any information generated, transmitted, received, stored or hosted in any computer resource. (2) The intermediary who fails to comply with the direction issued under sub-section (1) shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
Section 70. Protected system. - (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare any computer resource which directly or indirectly affects the facility of Critical Information Infrastructure, to be a protected system. (3) Any person who secures access or attempts to secure access to a protected system in contravention of the provisions of this section shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
Section 70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) to serve as national agency for incident response. - (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint an agency of the Government to be called the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team. (4) The agency shall perform functions including collection, analysis and dissemination of information on cyber incidents, forecast and alerts, emergency measures for handling cyber security incidents.
Section 72. Penalty for breach of confidentiality and privacy. - Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, any person who, in pursuance of any of the powers conferred under this Act, rules or regulations made thereunder, has secured access to any electronic record, book, register, correspondence, information, document or other material without the consent of the person concerned discloses such electronic record to any other person shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
Section 72A. Punishment for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract. - Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, any person including an intermediary who, while providing services under the terms of lawful contract, has secured access to any material information containing personal information about another person, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to cause wrongful loss or wrongful gain discloses, without the consent of the person concerned, or in breach of a lawful contract, such material to any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with a fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.

CHAPTER XII - INTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES
Section 79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases (Safe Harbor). - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), an intermediary shall not be liable for any third party information, data, or communication link made available or hosted by him. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if- (a) the function of the intermediary is limited to providing access to a communication system over which information made available by third parties is transmitted or temporarily stored or hosted; or (b) the intermediary does not- (i) initiate the transmission, (ii) select the receiver of the transmission, and (iii) select or modify the information contained in the transmission; (c) the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties under this Act. (3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply if- (a) the intermediary has conspired, abetted, aided or induced the commission of the unlawful act; (b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by the appropriate Government that any information, data or communication link residing in or connected to a computer resource controlled by the intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, the intermediary fails to expeditiously remove or disable access to that material.
Section 85. Offences by companies. - (1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
